Received March 28, 2019, accepted April 19, 2019, date of publication April 23, 2019, date of current version June 11, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2019.2912917
Selective Dynamic Coded Cooperative
Communications for Multi-Hop Underwater
Acoustic Sensor Networks
YOUGAN CHEN
1,2, (Member, IEEE), XIAOTING JIN1,2, LEI WAN3, (Member, IEEE),
XIAOKANG ZHANG1,2, AND XIAOMEI XU1,2
1Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic Communication and Marine Information Technology (Xiamen University), Ministry of Education, Xiamen 361005,
China
2Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University, Shenzhen 518000, China
3College of Underwater Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
Corresponding author: Xiaomei Xu (xmxu@xmu.edu.cn)
This work was supported in part by the Basic Research Program of Science and Technology of Shenzhen, China, under Grant
JCYJ20170818141735140, in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2016YFC1400200,
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 41476026, Grant 41676024, and Grant 61801139, in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China under Grant 20720180078 and Grant 20720180105, and in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China under Grant 2018J05071.
ABSTRACT Due to the limitation of acoustic velocity in underwater environments, propagation delay is a
horrible problem in multi-hop underwater acoustic sensor networks (UW-ASNs). In this paper, we proposed
an improved scheme of dynamic coded cooperation called selective dynamic coded cooperation (S-DCC)
for the multi-hop UW-ASNs, aiming at reducing the end-to-end delay and improving the transmission
efciency. In S-DCC scheme, the cooperative node actively transmits blocks with limited redundancy; yet
the receiver only selectively receives those cooperative blocks depending on its own decoding conditions.
The S-DCC scheme can utilize the retransmission mechanism adequately to eliminate the waiting time and
drastically shorten the overall transmission time, the gain of which increases linearly with the number of
hops. Concerning the transmission delay and energy consumption, we evaluated the performances with the
different maximum number of retransmissions and different data burst sizes for the proposed S-DCC scheme
and other compared schemes. The simulation results showed that the proposed S-DCC scheme could achieve
decent outage performance and reduce the end-to-end delay effectively without extra energy consumption
compared with other existing schemes, especially for the cases with low transmission signal to noise ratio.
Sea test data were also adopted to further verify the conclusions.
INDEX TERMS Energy consumption, multi-hop networks, end-to-end delay, underwater acoustic commu-
nications.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the development of the exploration of the oceans,
the traditional node-to-node underwater acoustic commu-
nication has been transformed into networks. Underwater
Acoustic Sensor Networks (UW-ASNs) have been exten-
sively used in marine research, commercial and military
applications [1], [2]. However, the design of UW-ASNs
is a challenging task due to the harsh characteristics of
underwater acoustic channels, such as limited frequency,
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Cunhua Pan.distance-dependent bandwidth, high propagation delay, high
bit error rates and temporary loss of connectivity.
In underwater acoustic environments, much more trans-
mission power is required for direct long distance commu-
nication. Hence the long link is usually divided into several
short links in multi-hop transmissions where the data can
be transmitted at a higher rate in each hop. This is because
multi-hop system can decrease signal attenuation and provide
more available bandwidth [3], which is especially appealing
to underwater acoustic channels. On the other hand, most
sensor nodes in multi-hop UW-ASNs are battery powered and
are difcult to recharge or replace, which calls for attention to
the transmission efciency during the design of UW-ASNs.
705522169-3536 
2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
Generally, the end-to-end delay and energy efciency are
the key metrics considered in the design of UW-ASNs. There
have been several research articles [4][6] about the end-
to-end delay and energy-efciency in linear UW-ASNs with
different focuses. In [4], it proposes an energy-efciency grid
routing based on 3D cubes for UW-ASNs, considering the
3D changing topology, high propagation delay, node mobil-
ity and density. The literature in [5] shows the bandwidth-
distance, power-distance and delay-distance relationships,
respectively, for energy-efcient design in UW-ASNs. Fur-
thermore, in [6], the tradeoffs between energy consump-
tion and network connectivity in UW-ASNs are investigated.
Although the aforementioned papers provide some closed-
form approximate models, it is still difcult to draw a con-
clusion for the relationship between energy consumption and
multi-hop network design in the string UW-ASNs. More-
over, most of the references do not consider the cooperative
transmission.
To combat underwater channel unreliability and large path
losses, cooperative transmission has been applied in under-
water acoustic communications as an ideal solution. In [7],
it demonstrates the superiority of cooperative underwater
acoustic communication systems over the point-to-point sys-
tems, and they meet the requirements of UW-ASNs. For
the cooperative communications, the design of relay strat-
egy is crucial, and lots of schemes have been studied, such
as amplify-and-forward (AF), decode-and-forward (DF) and
compression-and-forward (CF) [8], [9]. Especially, dynamic
coded cooperation (DCC) [10][12] has been proposed by
investigating the combination of coding and relay cooper-
ation. In [13], we proposed orthogonal-frequency-division
multiplexing (OFDM) modulated DCC for three-node under-
water acoustic cooperative networks, where the relay node
can randomly access the point-to-point transmission proce-
dure and enhance the communications by exploiting the ben-
et of rate-compatible coding. As shown in [13], signicant
gain was achieved by DCC in underwater acoustic channels,
and therefore it is a promising technique in the design of
future UW-ASNs. However, in adverse channel conditions,
the existing DCC protocols require the cooperative node to
retransmit the data with feedback signal in each hop. Once in
the multi-hop scenario of UW-ASNs, this will result in an
accumulative effect of end-to-end delay due to the request
time for retransmission in each hop. Hence there still exists
serious end-to-end delay problems in the DCC protocol [14]
when further applied to the multi-hop UW-ASNs. In order to
reduce the end-to-end delay and make DCC more suitable for
the multi-hop scenario, in this paper we propose an improved
scheme based on the DCC protocol, called Selective Dynamic
Coded Cooperation (S-DCC) protocol as the relay strategy for
multi-hop UW-ASNs.
The main contributions of this paper are as bellow:
1) Presenting an improved scheme named S-DCC based on
the DCC protocol. In the proposed protocol, the cooperative
nodes retransmit blocks actively and redundantly, and the
receiver nodes selectively receive and deal with these blocksaccording to its instant decoding results. Hence the waiting
time of feedback signal sent by the receiver to the cooperative
node can be used for the redundant blocks' transmission,
although they might not be adopted for dynamic decoding
eventually. In other words, since the request time for retrans-
mission is eliminated, S-DCC can drastically shorten the
overall transmission time for the multi-hop UW-ASNs system
compared with the existing DCC protocols.
In addition, the main idea of Cooperative Hybrid Auto-
matic Repeat reQuest (C-HARQ) protocol for UW-ASNs
in [15] is to retransmit the erroneous part instead of entire
packet to reduce the delay from the cooperative node, which
essentially merges Cooperative ARQ (C-ARQ) with a Hybrid
ARQ (HARQ) technique. Yet it does not concern the DCC
protocol or S-DCC protocol. Instead of retransmitting the
erroneous part packet , the cooperative node transmits part of
thepartial coded packet in DCC or S-DCC protocol, where
thepartial coded packet can be arbitrarily added to the
received data as a whole codeword for decoding, so as to
utilize the benets of both the broadcasting listening and
cooperation phases. More details about the design of C-ARQ,
HARQ and C-HARQ in underwater acoustic channels can be
found in [15].
2) Investigating the delay-energy relationship in multi-hop
UW-ASNs for both S-DCC and DCC protocols. We com-
pare the outage probability, end-to-end delay and energy
consumption of the S-DCC, DCC, C-ARQ protocols and
the conventional stop and wait ARQ (S&W ARQ) proto-
col in the multi-hop UW-ASNs. Simulation results show
that, the proposed S-DCC scheme can achieve decent outage
performance and reduce end-to-end delay effectively with-
out extra energy consumption, compared with other existing
schemes. The proposed S-DCC scheme is a feasible coop-
erative strategy for low transmission Signal to Noise Ratio
(SNR). The sea test data are adopted to further verify the
conclusions.
3) Given the target performance, e.g., the outage prob-
ability of the multi-hop UW-ASNs system Pout10 2,
we study the performances with different maximum numbers
of retransmissions and block sizes of data burst for both
S-DCC and DCC protocols, which will help the design and
application of the proposed scheme in practice.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
the network topology of multi-hop UW-ASNs, underwater
acoustic channels and energy consumption for underwater
acoustic transmission are introduced. Section III presents
the proposed S-DCC protocol in detail, including its end-to-
end delay and energy consumption for multi-hop UW-ASNs
system. Simulation and experimental results are presented in
Section IV and V, respectively. Finally, Section VI concludes
this paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we present the network topology and under-
water energy consumption model. Table 1 summarizes key
symbols used throughout the paper.
VOLUME 7, 2019 70553

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
TABLE 1. List of key symbols.
A. NETWORK TOPOLOGY
As shown in Fig. 1, we consider a cooperative Nh-hop
UW-ASN consisting of the source node S, Nh-1 relay
nodes, and the destination node D, with several coopera-
tive nodes among them. The relay can be expressed as Ri
(iD1;2;Nh 1), and the cooperative node is written as
Ci(iD1;2,Nh).
We have adopted the following assumptions for each hop
transmission in the network:
1) Nodes are in half-duplex where nodes cannot transmit
and receive data at the same time;
2) As the focuses are primarily on the ARQ issues,
we assume that all the medium access control issues
have been resolved. Therefore, the so-called source-relay-
destination three nodes in each hop are actually upgraded as
Ri 1-Ci-Riin the multi-hop UW-ASNs scenario. Further, it's
assumed that, the transmission of Ri 1can only be received
by the two neighboring relay nodes, i.e., RiandRi 2; and
FIGURE 1. ANh-hop cooperative network adopting the coded
cooperation scheme.
the transmission of the cooperative node Cican only be
heard by the neighboring relay nodes Ri 1andRi. With this
assumption, the data transmission in one hop will not affect
the next hop;
3) The transmission path is predetermined by the optimal
routing algorithm for a given S-D pair, and in each hop,
the best node can be selected as the cooperative node in the
candidate nodes. The designs of optimal routing algorithm,
including the selection of relay nodes Ri(iD1;2;:::; Nh 
1) and cooperative nodes Ci(iD1;2;:::; Nh 1), are beyond
the scope of this paper.
According to the above assumptions, since each hop con-
sisting of source-relay-destination 3 nodes is predetermined
in the multi-hop network, and the transmission in each hop
will not be received by the next hop, the data transmission is
indeed carried out strictly hop by hop. In this case, there is no
impact between the transmission inside different hops, and
the performance analysis of the energy consumption, delay,
and outage probability for the whole network can be divided
into independent hops. The energy consumption and end-
to-end delay of the multi-hop network are the summation
of the energy consumption and transmission delay inside
each hop, while the outage probability is calculated based
on the fact that the network will be outage if any one hop is
outage.
For the convenience of illustration, a linear uniform multi-
hop network [3] is shown in Fig. 1, in which the distance of
each hop is d/Nh, where dis the distance between S and D.
However, the following discussions in this paper, including
the analysis on energy consumption, end-to-end delay and
outage probability performances are still valid for network
topologies other than linear, or for the case of different dis-
tances between the hops, as long as the above assumptions
are satised.
B. UNDERWATER ENERGY CONSUMPTION MODEL
Usually, underwater acoustic data transmission can be
described by the passive sonar equation. Then the SNR at the
receiver can be presented as follows [3],
SNRDSL TL NLCDI; (1)
where SL;TL;NLandDIare, in dB, the source level, trans-
mission loss, noise level and directivity index respectively.
When adopting omnidirectional hydrophones, the directivity
index is set as 0.
70554 VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
For a transmission distance din meter and frequency fin
kHz, the transmission loss TL is given by [16]
TLDk10 log10.d/C.f/d10 3; (2)
where the rst term is the spreading loss with krepresents
the the spreading factor, and the second term is the absorption
loss with.f/represents the absorption coefcient in dB/km.
Commonly, the spreading factor kcan be set as 1.5 in practi-
cal spreading for underwater acoustic transmission. Follow-
ing Thorp's formula [17], the absorption coefcient is V
(f)D0:11f2
1Cf2C44f2
4100Cf2C2:7510 4f2C0:003:(3)
The ocean ambient noise is modeled by Gaussian statis-
tics and the Power Spectral Density (PSD). Four different
noise sources are usually considered: turbulence, shipping,
waves and thermal noise. Their strength can be respectively
expressed as (in dB re Pa per Hz) [3]
NLtD10 log Nt.f/D17 30 log f
NLsD10 log Ns.f/D40C20.s 0:5/
C26 log f 60 log.fC0:03/
NLwD10 log Nw.f/D50C7:5w.1=2/
C20 log f 40 log.fC0:4/
NLthD10 log Nth(f)D 15C20 log f; (4)
where sis the shipping activity factor, wis the wind speed
in m/s. Dene NLi.f/(i2N Dft;s;w;thg), then the total
noise isV
N.f/DNt.f/CNs.f/CNw.f/CNth.f/: (5)
Expressed in dB, that is
NLD10 log N(f)D10 logX
i2N 10NLi/10: (6)
From (1), obviously, for a given receiver SNR 0with known
TLandNL, the energy consumption at the transmitter can
be calculated from the source level SL. And the SLis given
by [16]
SLD10 log10It
Iref; (7)
where Itis the intensity of the sound emitted by the transmit-
ter, and the reference intensity Irefin underwater sound [16]
is usually the intensity of a plane wave having an root-
mean-square pressure equal to 1 Pa, denoted as Iref
0:66710 18W/m2. That is related to the effective sound
pressure, the density of sea water, and the propagation veloc-
ity of sound wave cin sea water. Without loss of generality,
we assume a constant speed of cD1500 m/s.
In the case of cylindrical spreading, the power Ptrequired
to achieve intensity Itat 1 meter from the source in the
direction of the receiver is [17]:
PtD2zIt; (8)
where Ptis in watt and zis the water depth in meter.According to (1), (2), (6), (7) and (8), with the optimal
frequency f0for a given d, the power Ptcan be expressed
as
PtD2z0Iref10TLCNLCSNR0
10jfDf0; (9)
where SNR 0andz0are the corresponding SNR and zin
practical design when operating on the optimal frequency f0.
For the commercial hydrophone [18], it consumes about
one fth of the transmitted energy at the receiver for a packet.
Then, the energy consumed at the transmitter Etand the
receiver Ercan be written as
EtDPtl
bDPtTl; (10)
ErD1
5Et; (11)
where lis the length of the packet in bits, bis the bit rate in
bps,Tlis the time cost for transmitting lbits in second.
III. THE PROPOSED S-DCC PROTOCAL FOR MUTI-HOP
UW-ASNS
A. SELECTIVE DYNAMIC CODED COOPERATIVE
PROTOCOL
Consider a burst-based transmission for the multi-hop UW-
ASNs in the following discussion. Each burst consists of Nbl
blocks, and we take the OFDM block as the example for
analysis [14]. Over the Nblblocks, we use erasure-correction
channel code for the inter-block encoding, which is the foun-
dation for coded cooperation at relays.
Before illustrating the S-DCC protocol, we rst briey
introduce the conventional stop and wait ARQ (S&W
ARQ) protocol, the cooperative ARQ (C-ARQ) proto-
col and the dynamic coded cooperation (DCC) protocol
in [13], [15], [19]. They are illustrated in Figs. 2 (a),
(b) and (c) respectively, where the ( i-1)-th relay node
Ri 1is the transmitter, and the i-th relay node R iis the
receiver. In each ``R i 1-Ci-Ri'' transmission unit, when
adopting the S&W ARQ protocol, the receiver will send a
NAK signal to the transmitter for retransmission request if it
cannot decode the blocks correctly, while it is to the coop-
erative node when adopting the C-ARQ protocol. Therefore,
the C-ARQ protocol can improve the transmission success
rate since the cooperative node is located between the trans-
mitter and receiver. In the meanwhile, it can reduce the end-
to-end delay because both NAK signal and retransmission
happen in a shorter distance, as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Further
more, when adopting the DCC protocol, the cooperative node
only retransmits part of blocks (say Nliblocks) instead of
all the blocks (say Nblblocks) as shown in Fig. 2 (c) once
retransmission occurs. It can further reduce the end-to-end
delay because of the shorter retransmission time; meanwhile,
theNliblocks can be added to the front of Ncoopblocks
for joint decoding and it can improve the performance of
decoding [13].
However, in DCC protocol, after sending a NAK signal to
the cooperative node C i, the receiver R istill needs to wait
VOLUME 7, 2019 70555

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
FIGURE 2. Different cooperation schemes for each hop in multi-hop
UW-ASNs: (a) Conventional stop and wait ARQ (S&W ARQ) protocol;
(b) Cooperative ARQ (C-ARQ) protocol; (c) Dynamic Coded Cooperation
(DCC) protocol; (d) Selective Dynamic Coded Cooperation (S-DCC)
protocol.
for the retransmission from node C i. Since both NAK signal
and data retransmission still occupy extra time, the receiver
is in idle in the Twaitperiod. To further eliminate this waiting
time, we propose that the cooperative node C iretransmits the
Nlilistening blocks immediately after the Ncoopcooperation
blocks, and then the receiver R ican take different actions on
these Nliblocks, depending on its instant decoding results.
The proposed scheme can shorten the NAK signal's transmis-
sion time, and especially it can observably shorten the overall
end-to-end delay for the multi-hop UW-ASNs due to the
accumulated benet. As the receiver selectively handles with
the redundant Nliblocks, we name it as selective dynamic
coded cooperative (S-DCC) protocol.
For the S-DCC protocol, to get a reliable transmission in
each hop, it works in the following steps.
1) ACTIVE RETRANSMITTING BASED ON BURST
TRANSMISSION: during the listening phase, the coopera-
tive node C itry to carry out instantaneous decoding every
time receiving one more block from node R i 1; immediately
after the information bits within one burst are successfully
recovered, say Nliblocks, the cooperative node C iregenerates
the coded transmission blocks, say NcoopDNbl Nliblocks,
and switches to cooperative phase and relays the data to
node R i. After this, the cooperative node C iwill actively
retransmits the rst Nliblocks following the Ncoopblocks
under a given period of time, say Tdyna, as shown in Fig. 2 (d).
2) SELECTIVE RECEIVING BASED ON JOINT
DECODING: the receiver node R iwill rstly carry out jointdecoding by combining the Nblblocks from node R i 1with
the last Ncoopblocks from cooperative node C i; if it is unable
to decode correctly, the receiver node R iwill receive the
following retransmitted Nliblocks from cooperative node C i,
which can be added to the previously available Nblblocks for
joint decoding; if the receiver decodes correctly, it will skip
these retransmitted N liblocks and send ACK signal to the
transmitter node R i 1.
Note that the cooperative node can retransmit Nliblocks
several times until reaching the given maximum retransmis-
sion time. And the receiver may carry out joint decoding upon
the received Nblblocks, Ncoopblocks and all the retransmit-
tedNliblocks depending on the underwater acoustic chan-
nel state. However, as the underwater acoustic modem is
working on half-duplex mechanism, the cooperative node
can not receive the ACK signal from the receiver during its
retransmission of the Nliblocks to the receiver. Hence the
retransmit time can not be set too large, which is determined
by the underwater acoustic channel states, the length of the Nli
blocks, and the distance between the cooperative node and the
receiver node. We will adjust this parameter by simulation in
the following.
B. ENERGY CONSUMPTION
The summation of the energy consumption in each hop can
be described as
EtotalDNhX
iD1Ehop;i; (12)
where Ehop;iis the energy consumed in the i-th hop. The
energy consumed in transmitting and receiving one block is
represented as Eblock
tx andEblock
rx respectively. When operating
in the idle mode, the energy consumed is written as EIdle.
Then we can further express the energy consumption as V
Eblock
txDPtTblock
Eblock
rxDPrTblock
EIdleDPIdleTIdle; (13)
where Pt,Pr,PIdle,Tblock andTIdleare the transmission
power, reception power, idle mode operating power, block
transmission time and idle mode operating time, respectively.
Besides, the energy consumption of transmitting and receiv-
ing an ACK or NAK signal can be expressed as EACK=NAK
tx
andEACK=NAK
rx respectively. In this paper, we assume the
duration and energy consumption of ACK are equal to those
of the NAK because of the same length.
Following Section II A, the analysis of the energy con-
sumption of the whole network can be divided into each
independent hop. For the i-th hop, i.e., the `` Ri 1-Ci-Ri'' unit
in the multi-hop UW-ASNs scenario as shown in Fig. 2, the
total energy consumption can be calculated as V
Ehop;iDERi 1CECiCERi; (14)
where ERi 1,ECiandERiare the energy consumed at trans-
mitter node Ri 1, the cooperative node Ciand receiver node
70556 VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
Ri, respectively. In particular, we assume the transmitter node
Ri 1transmits a packet comprising Nblblocks data for Tx
times in total, invoking a total of Txcooperation processes in
the cooperative node Ci, until the packet is successfully deliv-
ered to the receiver node Ri; during each cooperation process,
such as the Tx-th cooperation process, the cooperative node Ci
retransmits Cxtimes of the Nliblocks, until the receiver node
Risuccessfully decoded all the Nblblocks. When TxDuand
CxDv, (14) can be written as
Ehop;iTxDu
CxDvDERi 1;iTxDu
CxDvCECi;iTxDu
CxDvCERi;iTxDu
CxDv:
(15)
Furthermore, we dene Pr fTxDu;CxDvgto be the
probability that for a successful delivery it takes TxDu
times packet transmissions from the transmitter, and the
nal delivery coming after CxDvtimes cooperation
have been required, with u2f1;2;3;;1gandv2
f0;1;2;;Mmaxg, where Mmaxrepresents the maximum
transmission times of the cooperative node Ci. Let Ehop;i2
ES DCC;i;EC ARQ;i;EDCC;i	
denote three different proto-
cols, then we have the nal expression of energy consumption
asV
Ehop;iD1X
uD1MmaxX
vD0Ehop;iTxDu
CxDvPrfTxDu;CxDvg;(16)
where Ehop;i2
ES DCC;i;EC ARQ;i;EDCC;i	
and
Ehop;iTxDu
CxDv
2
ES DCC;iTxDu
CxDv;EC ARQ;iTxDu
CxDv;EDCC;iTxDu
CxDv
;
correspondingly.
Now let's derive the energy consumption of S-DCC proto-
colES DCC;irst. When TxDuandCxDv, the energy
consumption of the transmitter node Ri 1to transmit Nbl
blocks can be given by V
ERi 1;iTxDu
CxDvDuEdata
txC.u 1/ENAK
rxCEACK
rxCuERi 1
Idle
Du
NblEblock
txCEACK=NAK
rxCERi 1
Idle
(17)
where Edata
txis the energy consumption of transmitting the Nbl
blocks data.
Then, the energy consumption at the cooperative node Ci
and receiver node Rican be similarly presented as V
ECi;iTxDu
CxDv
Du
NliEblock
rxCNcoopEblock
txCvNliEblock
txCECi
Idle
(18)
ERi;iTxDu
CxDv
Du
NblEblock
rxCvES DCC
dynaCEACK=NAK
txCERi
Idle
;(19)
where
ES DCC
dynaD(
NliEblock
rx;jD0
0; jD1(20)When jD0, it means that the receiver can not decode
correctly after receiving Ncoopblocks and thus require the
cooperative Nlidata blocks for joint decoding.
Since the receiver node Rireceives the Nblblocks from the
transmitter node Ri 1andNcoopblocks from the cooperative
node Ciat the same time, and the duration time of Nblblocks
is longer than that of Ncoopblocks, we can only calculate the
duration time of Nblblocks in (19). That is why the energy
consumption of receiving the Ncoopblocks do not show up
in (19).
Above all, plug (17), (18) and (19) into (15), for the S-DCC
protocol in the i-th hop, we haveV
ES DCC;iTxDu
CxDv
DERi 1;iTxDu
CxDvCECi;iTxDu
CxDvCERi;iTxDu
CxDv
Du8
><
>: 
NblCNcoop
Eblock
txC.NliCNbl/Eblock
rx
Cv
NliEblock
txCES DCC
dyna
CEACK=NAK
rxCEACK=NAK
tx
CERi 1
IdleCECi
IdleCERi
Idle9
>=
>;
(21)
Similarly, for the other two cooperative protocols, we have
(22) and (23), as shown at the top of the next page, where
EDCC
dynaD
Eblock
txCEblock
rx
NliCEACK=NAK
txCEACK=ANK
rx
(24)
Therefore, with (21), (22) and (23) in hand, we can use (16)
to calculate the energy consumption for the three different
protocols.
C. END-TO-END DELAY
Similar to the derivation of energy consumption, we will
briey present the derivation of the end-to-end delay for the
three different protocols in the following. The aggregated
delay of each hop can be presented as
TtotalDNhX
iD1Thop;i (25)
Due to the independence between hops, we focus on the
delay analysis of one hop. For the i-th hop, the end-to-end
delay comprising the propagation delay and the transmission
latencyV
Thop;iDTpro;iCTtra;i (26)
where the propagation delay Tpro;iis related to the retrans-
mission time, the end-to-end distance, the sound velocity in
water, and different cooperation protocols. In each hop, let
Tprobe equal to the relay-to-relay distance divided by the
sound velocity in water for one transmission, i.e., TproD
d
Nhc. For the case of different distances between hops, Tpro
andd/Nhshould be modied as Tpro;ianddi(the distance
in the i-th hop), respectively. And Ttra;iis the transmission
time of a burst packet in each hop. It is related to the block
time duration and the number of blocks. Denote Tblas one
VOLUME 7, 2019 70557

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
EC ARQ;iTxDu
CxDvDu8
><
>: 
Eblock
txC2Eblock
rx
NblCv 
Eblock
txCEblock
rx
Nbl
CEACK=NAK
txCEACK=NAK
rx
CEACK=NAK
txCEACK=NAK
rxCERi 1
IdleCECi
IdleCERi
Idle9
>=
>;(22)
E
DCC;iTxDu
CxDvDu2
64 
NblCNcoop
Eblock
txC.NblCNli/Eblock
rx
CvEDCC
dynaCEACK=NAK
txCEACK=NAK
rx
CERi 1
IdleCECi
IdleCERi
Idle3
75 (23)
block time-duration, then TtraDNblTblfor one transmis-
sion. Assume the ACK, NAK signal duration is Tck:In the
following, let Thop;i2
TC ARQ;i;TDCC;i;TS DCC;i	
denote
the delay corresponding to three different protocols.
Dene TstrandTdecas the state transition delay, the node
processing time, respectively. Synchronizing the reception
blocks has been illustrated in [13]. Thus, according to Fig.2,
letTxDuandCxDv, for the C-ARQ protocol, DCC
protocol and S-DCC protocol, we can derive that
TC ARQ;iTxDu
CxDv
Du2TproCTtraCv 
TproCTtraCTckC2Tstr
CTckC2Tstr
(27)
TDCC;iTxDu
CxDv
Du2TproCTtraCv 
TproCTdynaCTckC2Tstr
CTckC2Tstr
(28)
TS DCC;iTxDu
CxDv
Du2TproCTtraCv 
TdynaCTdec
CTckC2Tstr
(29)
where Tdynais the dynamic transmission time for the coop-
erative node to retransmit the blocks in the DCC or S-DCC
protocol, and can be expressed as
TdynaDNliTbl (30)
Introducing the PrfTxDu;CxDvg, we have the nal
expression of end-to-end delay as
Thop;iD1X
uD1MmaxX
vD0Thop;iTxDu
CxDvPrfTxDu;CxDvg(31)
where Thop;i2
TC ARQ;i;TDCC;i;TS DCC;i	
and
Thop;iTxDu
CxDv
2
TC ARQ;iTxDu
CxDv;TDCC;iTxDu
CxDv;TS DCC;iTxDu
CxDv
;
correspondingly.
The theoretical calculation of Pr fTxDu;CxDvgis
beyond the scope of this paper, hence computer simulations
are used instead.IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. SIMULATION SETUP
For the Nh-hop UW-ASNs network, let NhD5, and the
distance in each hop is d/NhD2 km. In each burst packet,
let the transmission data burst size be NblD20 blocks
coded over IblD10 information blocks, then the information
rate is rD0:5 bit/symbol. The OFDM parameters of the
transmitter are the same as those in [20], such as subcarrier
number KD1024, center frequency fcD10 kHz. We use
the quasi-static fading underwater acoustic channel model,
where the multi-path channels are randomly generated with
50 taps in the baseband [2], [14]. Without loss of generality,
in the `` Ri 1-Ci-Ri'' unit, we set the transmission times of
Ri 1is only once, and the maximum number of transmissions
of the cooperative node Ciis also one during the simulation,
i.e.,fu;MmaxgDf 1;1g. This is the general parameter setting
except during the study of impact of different Mmaxvalues.
In addition, to evaluate the energy consumption and end-to-
end delay, we use Monte Carlo method to obtain the results
according to (12) and (25).
Instead of a practical code, we assume the erasure-
correction codes are capacity-achieving codes thus the mutual
information (MI) can be adopted to calculate the outage
probability of the transmission, which can indicate whether
a packet can be decoded correctly at the receiver. For
the node-to-node transmission with KOFDM sub-carriers,
an outage occurs if the total MI at the destination is
lower than the information rate r, which can be expressed
asV
PoutDPrfMI<rg
DPr8
<
:1
KK/2 1X
kD K/2log2
1CjH[k]j2Es
N0
<r9
=
;;
(32)
where H[k] is the channel complex equivalent factor at
thek-th subcarrier, and Es
N0is the SNR at the receiver
node.
Specically, for the S-DCC protocol, in the i-th hop,
the outage probability can be calculated in (33), as shown at
the bottom of the next page where Hsddenotes the channel
frequency response between the source and the destination,
Hrddenotes the channel frequency response between the
cooperative node and the destination, and jD0 or 1. When
jD0;it regresses to DCC protocol; when jD1, it means that
70558 VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
the receiver can not decode correctly after receiving Ncoop
blocks and thus requires the cooperative Nlidata blocks for
joint decoding.
In the multi-hop network where the information is trans-
mitted hop by hop and the signal transmission in one hop
will not affect the other hops, each hop will have independent
probability of outage and the network outage will happen if
any hop is outage. Then the outage probability of the whole
Nh-hop system is
Pout
S DCCD1 NhY
iD1 
1 Pout
S DCC;i
(34)
B. SIMULATION RESULTS
1) IMPACT OF DIFFERENT PROTOCOLS
Fig. 3 (a) demonstrates the overall outage probability of
S-DCC protocol and other protocols. We can see that the
proposed S-DCC protocol is slightly better than C-ARQ
protocol and overlaps with DCC protocol, and all of them
outperform the S&W ARQ protocol. As shown in Fig. 3(b),
the proposed S-DCC protocol has the minimum end-to-end
delay among these protocols. Especially, for Pout10 2
(P
2
wD47 48dB, where P
2
wVD SL NLis
the transmission SNR in dB), the performance of end-to-
end delay of S-DCC is better than that of DCC because of
the new retransmission mechanism for S-DCC. Specically,
the S-DCC protocol can eliminate the feedback signal from
theRinode to Cinode and hence reduces the overall end-
to-end delay in retransmission. However, performances of
S-DCC and DCC become close at high transmission SNR
region, and this is because no more retransmissions are
needed for both of them as the transmission SNR increases.
Therefore, the proposed S-DCC protocol can achieve good
outage performance while reducing the end-to-end delay,
relative to existing protocols. Since (A) the outage perfor-
mance of S&W ARQ protocol is much worse than the other
three cooperative protocols, which is extremely detrimental
to the multi-hop UW-ASNs scenario. And all the cooperative
protocols should have the same energy consumption and time
delay happened in the cooperative node selection stage; (B) in
a relative static network (as required by DCC, because it
needs the exact distance information between the 3 nodes),
the energy consumption and time delay happened in the coop-
erative node selection stage should be insignicant compared
with the data transmission, we will skip S&W ARQ and will
not include the energy consumption and time delay happened
in the cooperative node selection stage. Instead, we focus on
FIGURE 3. Performance comparison of several network schemes:
(a) Overall outage probability; (b) End-to-end delay.
the comparison of the three cooperative protocols in the data
transmission in the following discussions.
To clearly understand energy consumption of the three
cooperative protocols, Fig. 4 (a) shows the energy con-
sumption results. It can be found that in the low trans-
mission SNR region (46-48 dB), the energy consumption
of S-DCC is slightly lower than the other two protocols,
but with the increase of transmission SNR, the energy con-
sumption of S-DCC increases more than DCC. This is
because that the receiver only needs one transmission to
successfully decode the information without the coopera-
tive node's retransmission at high SNR region. Hence for
the S-DCC, the receiver does not use the extra Nliblocks
transmitted by cooperative node, causing additional energy
consumption.
Pout
S DCC;iDPrfMI<rg
DPr8
<
:1
KkDK/2 1X
kD K/2Nbllog2 
1CjHsd[k]j2Es
N0
CNcooplog2 
1CjHsd[k]CHrd[k]j2Es
N0
CjNlilog2 
1CjHrd[k]j2Es
N0
<rNbl9
=
;;
(33)
VOLUME 7, 2019 70559

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
FIGURE 4. Energy consumptions of several cooperative schemes:
(a) Energy consumption; (b) Energy consumption comparison.
Set the target outage probability of the three cooperative
protocols to be Pout10 2, the corresponding transmission
SNR is about 48 dB according to Fig. 3 (a). Fig. 4 (b) shows
the comparison of energy consumptions at the transmission
SNR around 48 dB. When meeting the outage probability
demand, the energy consumption of S-DCC is more econom-
ical than the other two schemes at low transmission SNR
region.
2) IMPACT OF COOPERATIVE TRANSMISSION TIMES
In (16) and (31), let Mmax2f1;2;3;4g,uD1, then the
maximum number of cooperative node transmission times is
between 1 and 4. To analyze the impact of maximum number
of retransmissions, we should ensure that the link between the
transmitter and the cooperative node cannot be interrupted.
Therefore the cooperative node is closer to the transmitter
than to the receiver in each hop. As shown in Fig. 5(a),
with the maximum number of retransmissions increasing,
the possibility of the receiver decodes correctly increases.
Specically, the cases of MmaxD2 and MmaxD3 have
about 0.5 dB and 0.7 dB gain, respectively, compared with
MmaxD1. The overall outage probability of MmaxD3
andMmaxD4 is similar. Thus, the outage probability will
FIGURE 5. The impact of the maximum number of retransmissions on
system performance: (a) Overall outage probability; (b) End-to-end
delay; (c) Energy consumption.
not increase innitely with the maximum number of retrans-
missions increasing. In addition, both S-DCC and DCC have
similar overall outage probability under the same setting of
maximum number of retransmissions.
Set the target outage probability to be Pout10 2,
the end-to-end delay and the energy consumption of these
two schemes are shown in Fig. 5 (b) and Fig. 5 (c). From
Fig. 5 (b), we can see that with the number of retransmissions
increasing, the end-to-end delay of DCC or S-DCC increases
70560 VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
FIGURE 6. The impact of data burst size on system performance:
(a) End-to-end delay; (b) Energy consumption.
slightly, and the end-to-end delay of S-DCC is always less
than that of DCC. From Fig. 5 (c), the energy consumption
of S-DCC increases with the number of retransmissions,
while the case for DCC is the opposite. When MmaxD1,
the energy consumption of S-DCC is slightly smaller than
the DCC, but when MmaxD2, the energy of S-DCC is
consumed by more than 10% compared with DCC. This is
because at high transmission SNR region, DCC only requests
retransmission from the cooperative node as needed, while
S-DCC may retransmit unnecessary cooperative blocks with-
out considering the receiver's decoding results and result in
the energy waste. Therefore, at the high transmission SNR
region, MmaxD1 is usually enough for S-DCC protocol.
3) IMPACT OF DATA BURST SIZE
Next, we investigate the impact of the data burst size in unit
of block on the end-to-end delay and energy consumption
for DCC and S-DCC, where the information rate is xed
at 0.5 bit/symbol. The results with target outage probability
performance are shown in Fig. 6. We can see that S-DCC
still outperforms DCC for any size setting of data block. This
is because in S-DCC, limited direct retransmission of the
cooperative blocks eliminates the waiting time of the receiver,
and less transmission of feedback signal reduces the energy
consumption.
FIGURE 7. Sea test data of underwater acoustic channel for the Xiamen
Wuyuan Bay: (a) The sound speed profile; (b) Channel impulse
response.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To further test the performance of S-DCC, the test data from
Xiamen Wuyuan bay on May 8, 2014, which lies in the
northern part of Xiamen, Fujian, China, are used to set up
the underwater acoustic channel model. The depth of the
transmitter and the receiver is 3 m and 4 m, respectively.
The distance between them is 903 m. The detection signal
is the LFM signal, whose duration is 24 ms and frequency
range is 20-22 kHz. The sampling frequency is 80 kHz, and
there is a 12 ms guard interval after detection signal. Fig. 7
(a) shows the sound speed prole of Xiamen Wuyuan Bay,
Fig. 7 (b) presents the channel impulse response of Wuyuan
Bay underwater acoustic channel, which have 8 multi-paths
and the maximum delay is approximately 12.5 ms. The results
are tested in level 3 sea state.
Table 2 shows the performance comparison of these three
protocols for Wuyuan Bay sea test channel. As expected,
the S-DCC outperforms both C-ARQ and DCC protocols at
lower transmission SNR region (the cases of 39.96 dB and
40.96 dB). As the transmission SNR increases (the cases
of 41.96 dB and 42.96 dB), once the decoding on the receiver
does not need the cooperative node's retransmission anymore,
S-DCC does not have the advantage in end-to-end delay,
and its energy consumption is increasing rapidly. This is
consistent with the previous analysis.
VOLUME 7, 2019 70561

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
TABLE 2. Results based on sea test data channel.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the improved dynamic coded
cooperative protocol named as S-DCC for multi-hop
UW-ASNs in terms of end-to-end delay and energy con-
sumption. Compared with S&W ARQ, C-ARQ and DCC
protocols, numerical results show that the proposed S-DCC
protocol can achieve decent outage performance while reduc-
ing end-to-end delay by selective cooperation, without extra
energy consumption. Particularly, the S-DCC is a feasible
cooperative strategy for low transmission SNR cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. Shenqin Huang and
Mr. Jianming Wu from Xiamen University for their contri-
butions to the discussion of this research. Key Laboratory of
Underwater Acoustic Communication and Marine Informa-
tion Technology and Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen
University contributed equally to this work.
REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Ghoreyshi, A. Shahrabi, T. Boutaleb, and M. Khalily, ``Mobile data
gathering with hop-constrained clustering in underwater sensor networks,''
IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 2111821132, 2019.
[2] S. Jiang, ``On reliable data transfer in underwater acoustic networks:
A survey from networking perspective,'' IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. ,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 10361055, 2nd Quart. 2018.
[3] W. Zhang, M. Stojanovic, and U. Mitra, ``Analysis of a linear multi-
hop underwater acoustic network,'' IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. , vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 961970, Oct. 2010.
[4] M. Stojanovic, ``On the relationship between capacity and distance in an
underwater acoustic communication channel,'' ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile
Comput. Commun. Rev. , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3443, Oct. 2007.
[5] M. Zorzi, P. Casari, N. Baldo, and A. F. Harris, ``Energy-efcient routing
schemes for underwater acoustic networks,'' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. ,
vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 17541766, Dec. 2008.
[6] M. Felemban and E. Felemban, ``Energy-delay tradeoffs for underwater
acoustic sensor networks,'' in Proc. 1st Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun.
Netw. (BlackSeaCom) , Jul. 2013, pp. 4549.
[7] S. Al-Dharrab, M. Uysal, and T. M. Duman, ``Cooperative underwa-
ter acoustic communications,'' IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 51, no. 7,
pp. 146153, Jul. 2013.[8] G. Al-Habian, A. Ghrayeb, M. Hasna, and A. Abu-Dayya, ``Threshold-
based relaying in coded cooperative networks,'' IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 123135, Jan. 2011.
[9] Q. Li, S. Ting, and C. K. Ho, ``A joint network and channel coding strategy
for wireless decode-and-forward relay networks,'' IEEE Trans. Commun. ,
vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 181193, Jan. 2011.
[10] J. Castura and Y. Mao, ``Rateless coding for wireless relay channels,''
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 16381642, May 2007.
[11] K. Kumar and G. Caire, ``Coding and decoding for the dynamic decode
and forward relay protocol,'' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 55, no. 7,
pp. 31863205, Jul. 2009.
[12] K. Ishibashi, K. Ishii, and H. Ochiai, ``Dynamic coded cooperation using
multiple turbo codes in wireless relay networks,'' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 197207, Feb. 2011.
[13] Y. Chen, Z.-H. Wang, L. Wan, H. Zhou, S. Zhou, and X. Xu,
``OFDM-modulated dynamic coded cooperation in underwater acous-
tic channels,'' IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. , vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 159168,
Jan. 2015.
[14] Y. Chen, X. Xu, S. Zhou, H. Su, and L. Zhang, ``Dynamic coded coop-
erative ARQ for multi-hop underwater acoustic networks,''in Proc. IEEE
OCEANS TAIPEI , Apr. 2014, pp. 15.
[15] A. Ghosh, J.-W. Lee, and H.-S. Cho, ``Throughput and energy efciency
of a cooperative hybrid ARQ protocol for underwater acoustic sensor
networks,'' Sensors , vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 1538515408, Nov. 2013.
[16] R. J. Urick, Principles of Underwater Sound . Los Altos, CA, USA:
Peninsula Pub, 1983.
[17] L. M. Brekhovskikh and Y. P. Lysanov, Fundamentals of Ocean Acoustics .
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1982.
[18] (2007). LINKQUEST INC. Underwater Acoustic Modem . [Online].
Available: http://www.linkquest.com
[19] J.-W. Lee and H.-S. Cho, ``A cooperative ARQ scheme for multi-hop
underwater acoustic sensor networks,'' in Proc. IEEE Symp. Underwater
Technol. Workshop Sci. Submarine Cables Rel. Technol. (SSC) , Tokyo,
Japan, Apr. 2011, pp. 14.
[20] H. Yan et al. , ``DSP based receiver implementation for OFDM acoustic
modems,'' Phys. Commun. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2232, Mar. 2012.
YOUGAN CHEN (S'12M'13) received the
B.S. degree in communication engineering from
Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU),
Xi'an, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in
communication engineering from Xiamen Univer-
sity (XMU), Xiamen, China, in 2012.
He visited the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Connecti-
cut (UCONN), Storrs, CT, USA, from 2010 to
2012. He has been an Assistant Professor with
the Department of Applied Ocean Physics and Engineering, XMU, since
2013. His research interests include communications and signal processing,
currently focusing on channel coding and cooperative communications for
underwater acoustic channels.
Dr. Chen has served as the Technical Reviewer for many journals and
conferences, such as the IEEE J OURNAL OF OCEANIC ENGINEERING , the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS , the IEEE A CCESS ,Sensors ,IET Communi-
cations , and ACM WUWNet Conference. He has been appointed to a 3-year
term as Associate Editor in IEEE Access effective May 2019. He served as a
Secretary for the IEEE ICSPCC 2017. He received Technological Invention
Award of Fujian Province, China, in 2017.
XIAOTING JIN received the B.S. degree in marine
technology and the M.S. degree in marine physics
from Xiamen University (XMU), Xiamen, China,
in 2014 and 2017, respectively. She was with
XMU, and is currently with the Fujian Provincial
Department of Ocean and Fisheries. Her research
interests include channel coding, cooperative com-
munications for underwater acoustic channels, and
wireless communication and navigation for shing
vessel.
70562 VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Chen et al.: S-DCC Communications for Multi-Hop UW-ASNs
LEI WAN (M'18) received the B.S. degree in
electronic information engineering from Tianjin
University (TJU), Tianjin, China, in 2006, the M.S.
degree in signal and information processing from
the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommu-
nications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2009, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
University of Connecticut (UCONN), Storrs, CT,
USA, in 2014.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
College of Underwater Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering Univer-
sity (HEU), Harbin, China. His research interests include the algorithm
design, system development, and performance analysis for high speed under-
water acoustic communication systems.
Dr. Wan has served as the Technical Reviewer for many journals and
conferences. He received the IEEE Communications Society's Exemplary
Reviewer Award for the IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS LETTERS , in 2013.
XIAOKANG ZHANG received the B.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in marine physics from Xiamen University
(XMU), Xiamen, China, in 2005 and 2010, respec-
tively. From 2010 to 2012, he was a Postdoctoral
Research Associate with the Center of Environ-
mental Science and Engineering, XMU. He has
been a Senior Engineer with the Department of
Applied Marine Physics and Engineering, XMU,
since 2012. His research interest includes under-
water acoustic communications.
XIAOMEI XU received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in marine physics from Xiamen University
(XMU), Xiamen, China, in 1982, 1988, and 2002,
respectively.
She was a Visiting Scholar with the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA,
from 1994 to 1995. She visited the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Connecticut (UCONN), Storrs, CT, USA, as a
Senior Visiting Scholar, in 2012. She is currently a Full Professor with the
Department of Applied Marine Physics and Engineering, XMU. Her research
interests include marine acoustics, underwater acoustic telemetry and remote
control, underwater acoustic communication, and signal processing.
VOLUME 7, 2019 70563

